---
title: I'm Scared of Learning Hard Stuff
slug: im-scared-of-learning-hard-stuff
date: 2018-05-01T16:32:04.000Z
---
<!--kg-card-begin: markdown--><p>At <a href="https://gusto.com">Gusto</a>, I work with engineers from diverse backgrounds of experience. Some of us came from the typical Silicon Valley companies like Google and Facebook, while others joined Gusto as their first startup. I started in a consulting shop in Minneapolis fresh out of college. It gave me the confidence to learn more on my own, but also taught me to learn in a way that I’m still trying to recover from. With the support of my colleagues and mentors, I’m learning how to learn in a way that will make me a better engineer and leader.</p>
<p>In my first job, I built mobile and web software for connected IoT devices that used Bluetooth. I worked on very small teams and had near-total ownership over my projects. This meant I got to learn in a way I really enjoyed: picking a greenfield approach, learning iOS or Android, and building with the shiniest new tools. In consulting, we weren’t often concerned with the legacy of our code – if the customer accepted delivery, we had finished our project and could move on.</p>
<h1 id="myapproachfallsapart">My Approach Falls Apart</h1>
<p>When I moved to Gusto, I entered a gauntlet of new and foreign technology. Gusto's engineers are full-stack, and my mentor asked me to start where I was weakest: a JavaScript frontend app built with React, Backbone, and Bootstrap. I did my best to adopt the organization's best practices around testing and code review. I became comfortable in the dev tools as well as the Rails console.</p>
<p>But as I moved into the thicker parts of the payroll domain, my team asked me to debug thornier issues. I had to figure out why a payment wasn't sent as expected, or why a feature I wrote was locking customers out of the app. This meant I had to dig into the five-year-old Gusto codebase. In contrast, I'd written the majority of my past codebases from scratch, so I knew about every dark corner harboring bugs. It was a shock to jump into Gusto and find out I knew nothing about the mechanisms I needed to fix. The codebase was complex and many of the authors had left the company. There was a lot I didn't know!</p>
<p>I coped with my inexperience by avoiding the problem. When we assigned tasks during sprint planning, I asked for the ones within my comfort zone. When fires happened in production or I needed to make important design decisions, I deferred to anyone who was confident about tackling the problem.</p>
<iframe src="https://giphy.com/embed/v0eHX3n28wvoQ" width="480" height="324" frameBorder="0" class="giphy-embed" allowFullScreen></iframe>
<p><em>Pictured: My reaction when asked to make hard decisions and work with scary code.</em></p>
<p>My coworkers noticed that I often spent time avoiding hard problems by working on other problems I enjoyed more. They saw me as someone who wrote excellent tests but became distracted when it came to building entire features. In my performance review, my PE (People Empowerer -- what we call a manager at Gusto) and I discussed my peer feedback:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>“You delegated a key decision on this Payroll Engineering story to an engineer that is your junior.”</p>
<p>“You spent a couple of days optimizing the build process, but you didn’t finish your stories for the week.”</p>
<p>“Your teammates don’t feel you’re focusing on the work you’re given, and they get the impression you may not be pulling your weight.”</p>
</blockquote>
<p>When everything added up, I found myself in the middle of the pack at Gusto. I wasn't yet reliable enough to be a senior-level engineer.</p>
<p>I wanted to do better. I thought about how working in a codebase with history and complexity made me feel. I discussed my feelings about code and engineering with my PE frankly and openly. I found that I'm scared of learning hard things.</p>
<h1 id="figuringoutwhatswrong">Figuring Out What’s Wrong</h1>
<p>At my old gig, I could almost always build a project from scratch. Because I built them myself, I understood everything about how they worked. Gusto presented me with intense problem domains, dozens of engineers committing at once, and a complex series of interlocked systems with side effects. It was petrifying to work with this codebase. What if I made a mistake? I could annoy my coworkers, upset our customers, and cost the company real money.</p>
<p>I found it easier to change only the parts I knew. But that caused me to leave projects without a deep understanding of their domain. I couldn't apply that knowledge to new projects I joined, even ones adjacent to my past work. And I felt less effective coming back to fix bugs in code I had written before.</p>
<p>My trepidation over working in an established codebase had led to a phobia. Our primary repo has over five hundred thousands of lines of Ruby code, interfaces with dozens of state and federal agencies, and has thousands of edge cases. I needed to make conscious decisions to get over my fear of the unknown and build my knowledge of the scary, cobwebbed corners of our payroll codebase. So my PE and I came up with actions I could consciously take to drive my independent study and help me learn through my work.</p>
<iframe src="https://giphy.com/embed/3R9LDINpbGX2o" width="480" height="265" frameBorder="0" class="giphy-embed" allowFullScreen></iframe>
<p><em>Pictured: I investigate tactical approaches to independent study and the growth-oriented mindset.</em></p>
<h1 id="changingmyapproach">Changing My Approach</h1>
<p>I aimed for the hard stuff on purpose. For example, I preferred stories that dealt with our automated tax filing system, rather than stories around building the frontend components I had grown comfortable with. During sprint planning meetings, I chose to take the tasks I knew nothing about. I hoped to learn more about the unknowns and gain a better understanding of our systems as a whole.</p>
<p>I spent more time investigating before asking for help. I used to spend about ten minutes investigating a difficult problem before asking for guidance. To change that, I came up with my personal Two-Hour Rule: I had to work at a problem for two hours before deciding it was time to ask someone for help.</p>
<p>I chose to avoid asking for help until I could describe my problem in detail. I used to ask for help after a brief period of not understanding the code I was looking at. To remedy this, I spent more time observing and thinking, then describing my understanding of the codebase on paper. I jotted down diagrams in a small notebook to help organize my thoughts and my mental models. For example, when I worked on a feature that interacted with our complex Historical Payroll model, I wrote pages of notes and diagrams that I eventually synthesized into a page of documentation for our company wiki.</p>
<p>To me, this was the road less traveled, but I found it made an immediate difference in the quality of my work. When I chose to stick with a difficult bug instead of asking for help, I often found I learned a lot about how the bug happened and how to fix it. In the end, I realized I didn’t need help after all. When I did need to ask for help, I could describe the problem completely, accurately, and point at the exact bits of code I didn't understand. When I left a project, I was able to write clear, concise documentation about what the code did and why – even if I hadn't written it originally.</p>
<iframe src="https://giphy.com/embed/UyPpKZScnl7na" width="480" height="270" frameBorder="0" class="giphy-embed" allowFullScreen></iframe>
<p><em>Pictured: My new approach to diving deep and documenting my work yields results.</em></p>
<h1 id="lookingforward">Looking Forward</h1>
<p>As I move forward, I want to learn and grow in my abilities.  It’s only been a short time since I adopted my new strategies, but I’ve already seen improvement in my ability to grok complex problems in my projects. I want to become a great engineer at Gusto, I want to grow as a skilled engineer in general, and I want to learn how to learn so I can continue my trajectory. I look forward to seeing how the skills I’m teaching myself will help me become a better leader at Gusto and wherever I go.</p>
<p>Gusto has been an incredible place for me to learn the skills around working with a large team on complex problems. I've received nothing but support as I grow in my abilities and develop my strengths. Come work with me to create a world where work empowers a better life! <a href="https://gusto.com/about/careers">Check out our open engineering positions in San Francisco and Denver.</a></p>
<!--kg-card-end: markdown-->